---
layout: post
title: "Playing with Podman"
date: yyyy-mm-dd hh:mm:ss -0600
publish: false
categories: centos podman pod jupyter systemd
---
# Centos 9 Streams
I have installed Centos 9 Streams on one of my home servers. As expected, no third party repositories support Centos 9 yet. Not even EPEL. This is not a problem as I can run all the services I need with podman.

## Podman to the Rescue.
Podman is a daemonless, rootless, container engine. Podman is designed to be a drop in replacment for Docker. You can even run Docker Compose files with a little extra setup. Some other advantages of podman is the ability to generate systemd service files or kubernetes Pod yaml files. Podman can be great at converting docker or docker-compose file to kubernetes yaml. 

## Deploying Jupyter Notebook with podman

Starting with something simple, lets deploy Jupyter Notebooks.

Podman will automatically create the necessary volume for your image, but I recommended that you specify a location or create a named volume.

Most guides recommend doing something like this:

```bash:
podman container run -d \
    --name jupyter \
    -p 6000:8888 \
    -v jupyter-work:/home/jovyan/work:Z \
    jupyter/scipy-notebook
```
This is okay, but then we have to get the token from the terminal. You run 'podman logs jupyter', copy the string after token=, It is all quite clunky really. 

What we can do is create our own token or disable tokens completely by adding "start-notebook.sh --NotebookApp.token=''" after scipy-notebook. If you want to create a token add --NotebookApp.token='my_token', replacing my_token with what ever you like. Much better than a random string of gibberish.

If systemd is manainging the container, and we will be generating a systemd service file, we can autoupdate the container as well by adding a '--label io.containers.autoupdate={local,registry}'. 

If you want to run JupyterLab, -e JUPYTER_ENABLE_LAB=yes.

Like Docker, if you need to access the container from a browser, you need to tell podman what port the container will listin in on. The syntax is '-p host:container'. In the example bellow, we are going to access Jupyter Notebooks from port 6000. The container internal port is 8888.

If you are deploying on a system running SELinux, you need to add a z or Z to the end of volumes. If the volume will be accessed by more than one container, use z, otherwise use Z. If you want to create a container tailored SELinux policy, look into udica.  

```bash:
podman container run -d \
    --name jupyter \
    --label io.containers.autoupdate=registry \
    -p 6000:8888 \
    -e JUPYTER_ENABLE_LAB=yes \
    -v /home/user/jupyter:/home/jovyan/work:Z \
    docker.io/jupyter/scipy-notebook start-notebook.sh --NotebookApp.token=''
```
With the above command we create a container named "jupyter", accessible from localhost:6000. Files will be saved and accessiable from host at ~/jupyter. Using Jupyter’s scipy-notebook image from Docker.io. Podman will check docker.io for new images. And notebook token is disabled.

Check if the container is running proberly
```Dockerfile:
podman container ps
```
If their is a problem, run 'podman logs jupyter'.

## Generating systemd service file

If everything is working as intended. All that is left is to generating the systemd service file, enable it and see if it workers.

If it does not alreayd exist, create the systemd user directory in your home directory.

```bash:
mkdir -p ~/.config/systemd/user
```

Next generate the systemd service file.

```bash:
podman generate systemd --user --new --name jupyter -f /home/user/.config/systemd/user/
``` 
This will create container-jupyter.service in ~/.config/systemd/user/. If you do not use --name you will get a service file named container-dg6464323fsdf34536...

After creating the service file, reload systemd.
```
Systemctl --user daemon-reload
```
Stop the jupyter container.
```bash:
podman stop jupyter
```
Enable and start container-jupyter.service.
```bash:
Systemctl --user enable --now container-jupyter.service
```
Check if everything worked
```bash:
Systemctl --user status container-jupyter
```
```bash:
podman container ps jupyter
```
If you want Jupyter notebook to be accessiable when the user is not logged in, you will need to run 
'''bash:
loginctl enable-linger user
'''
That is it. Simple and easy.
